# Environmental Simulation Modelling

Lecture notes of the Environmental Science master unit [ENVI5809](https://www.sydney.edu.au/courses/units-of-study/2022/envi/envi5809.html), taught to 2nd semester students at the University of Sydney.

**The course is available from the following [Jupyter-Book](https://tristansalles.github.io/EnviReef/welcome.html).**

This lecture is tailored for a semester-long class, but these notes might also be of interest to other (envi-) scientists wanting to learn how to query, analyse and visualise scientific dataset. 

## Aims
Outbreak populations of the crown-of-thorns starfish (COTS) cause widespread coral mortality. High nutrient river runoff generates phytoplankton blooms that potentially enhance larval food levels and success leading to outbreaks, a link posited by the terrestrial runoff hypothesis (TRH). Runoff plumes also lower salinity, although the parallel and potentially negative effects of freshening on COTS larvae, have not been considered. The impact of decreased salinity across a range of food levels on larval development and survival was investigated in context with the TRH. Larval survival and incidence of bipinnaria larvae with normal morphology in 6–7 salinities and 3 food treatments were quantified, at four time points, to generate salinity performance curves. Salinity was the major factor determining larval survival. At 24 hours of exposure the optimal salinity (Sopt) (≥90 % larval survival) was ~26–34 ‰ and the salinity with 50 % mortality (LS50) was 21.8 ‰. By 168 hours the LS50 was 27.3 ‰, showing a narrowing of salinity tolerance over time. Low salinity impaired swimming resulting in larvae sinking at < 25–30 ‰. This was not due to halted ciliary beating and may be a mechanism to escape deleterious low salinity surface water. The sharp onset of deleterious effects at 22–25 ‰ is commensurate with salinity levels that larvae would experience in runoff plumes. Counter to the hypothesis of eutrophic enhancement of larval success and outbreaks, a paradigm that has driven management regulations for decades, runoff plumes are likely to be deleterious for COTS larvae. The aim of the notebooks provided here is to identify regions of the GBR with saliinity and sediment plume levels that modify larval survival rates. 

The notes are a mix of examples and small exercises for you to try. They are written in [Jupyter Notebooks](https://jupyter-notebook.readthedocs.io).
